Cryptography API docs (#3319)
dapr/docs: daprdocs/content/en/developing-applications/building-blocks/cryptography/cryptography-overview.md

---
type: docs
title: Cryptography overview
linkTitle: Overview
weight: 1000
description: "Overview of Dapr Cryptography"
---

> With the cryptography API, you can leverage cryptography in a safe and consistent way. Dapr exposes an API that allows you to ask Dapr to perform operations, such as encrypting and decrypting messages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the cryptography building block, you can leverage cryptography in a safe and consistent way. Dapr exposes APIs that allows you to perform operations, such as encrypting and decrypting messages, within the Dapr sidecar, without exposing cryptographic keys to your application.
```

## Why Cryptography?

> Applications make extensive use of cryptography, which, when implemented correctly, can make solutions safer even when data is compromised. In certain cases, you may be required to use cryptography to comply with industry regulations (banking) or legal requirements (GDPR).  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Applications make extensive use of cryptography, which, when implemented correctly, can make solutions safer even when data is compromised. In certain cases, you may be required to use cryptography to comply with industry regulations (for example, in finance) or legal requirements (including privacy regulations such as GDPR).  
```

> However, leveraging cryptography is difficult; you need to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, leveraging cryptography correctly can be difficult. You need to:

```

- Pick the right algorithms and options
- Learn the proper way to manage and protect keys
- Navigate operational complexities when you wants limit access to cryptographic key material

Organizations have increasingly used tools and services to perform cryptography outside of applications, including:
- Hashicorp Vault, Azure Key Vault, AWS Key Management Service (KMS), Google Cloud KMS, etc.  
- On-prem Hardware Security Module (HSM) products like Thales Luna  

> While those products/services perform the same or very similar operations, their APIs are different.

Reviewer: For now we only support Azure Key Vault among the services listed here. So I think we should either remove this paragraph, or change it to something like:

```suggestion
One important requirement for security is limiting access to your cryptographic keys, what is often referred to as "raw key material". Dapr can integrate with key vaults such as Azure Key Vault (with more components coming in the future) which store keys in secure enclaves and perform cryptographic operations in the vaults, without exposing keys to your application or Dapr.

Alternatively, you can configure Dapr to manage the cryptographic keys for you, performing operations within the sidecar, again without exposing raw key material to your application.
```

## Cryptography in Dapr

> Similar to how Dapr offers an abstraction on top of secret stores, Dapr offers an abstraction layer on top of key management services or vaults (for the rest of this document referred to as "vaults").
> 
> With this abstraction layer, you can perform cryptographic operations without having to access raw key material. Dapr provides a selection of correctly configured algorithms that forbid the usage of unsafe algorithms and operations. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With Dapr, you can perform cryptographic operations without exposing cryptographic keys to your application.

- Similar to how Dapr offers an abstraction on top of secret stores, Dapr offers an abstraction layer on top of key management services or vaults (for the rest of this document referred to as "vaults").
- Additionally, Dapr includes a set of components ("built-in cryptography" components) that perform cryptographic operations within the Dapr sidecar, and which can be used when key vaults are not available. With these components, cryptographic operations are performed within Dapr's own cryptographic engine, again without exposing keys to your application.

Both kinds of components, either those leveraging key vaults or using the built-in cryptopgrahic engine in Dapr, offer the same abstraction layer, so your solution can switch between various vaults and/or built-in cryptography components as needed: for example, you can use a locally-stored key during development, and a cloud vault in production.
```

(I've removed "Dapr provides a selection of correctly-configured algorithms that forbid the usage of unsafe algorithms and operations." because it's in the bullet points below too)

Todo: diagram

> By using the cryptography API, it:

Reviewer: Thoughts on rephrasing this as "By using the cryptography building block, you:" (and then frame these as in "you can do X")?

- Makes it easier for you to perform cryptographic operations in a safe way. Dapr provides safeguards against using unsafe algorithms, or using algorithms with unsafe options.

> - Keeps keys outside of applications. Applications never see key material, but can request the vault to perform operations with the keys.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Keeps keys outside of applications. Applications never see the "raw key material", but can request the vault to perform operations with the keys. When using the built-in cryptographic engine of Dapr, operations are performed safely within the Dapr sidecar.
```

> - Allows greater separation of concerns. By using external vaults, only authorized teams can access private/shared key materials.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Allows greater separation of concerns. By using external vaults or cryptographic components, only authorized teams can access private/shared key materials.
```

- Simplifies key management and key rotation. Keys are managed in the vault and outside of the application, and they can be rotated without needing the developers to be involved (or even without restarting the apps).

> - Enables better audit logging to monitor when operations are performed with keys in the vault.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Enables better audit logging to monitor when operations are performed with keys in a vault.
```

Reviewer: Which raises a good point. perhaps we should implement some auditing for the built-in crypto too?

> > Only gRPC is available in the alpha release.

Reviewer: Remove as HTTP is available too, although for high-level crypto it's not recommended. The APIs exist but should only be used for quick development/testing. Using the SDKs (which use gRPC) is the recommended approach.

---
type: docs
title: Cryptography overview
linkTitle: Overview
weight: 1000
description: "Overview of Dapr Cryptography"
---

> With the Cryptography API, you can leverage cryptography in a safe and consistent way. Dapr exposes an API that allows you to ask Dapr to perform operations, such as encrypting and decrypting messages.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With the cryptography API, you can leverage cryptography in a safe and consistent way. Dapr exposes an API that allows you to ask Dapr to perform operations, such as encrypting and decrypting messages.
```

## Why Cryptography?

> Modern applications make extensive use of cryptography, which, when implemented correctly, can make solutions safer even when data is compromised. In certain cases, you may be required to use cryptography to comply with industry regulations (banking) or legal requirements (GDPR). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Applications make extensive use of cryptography, which, when implemented correctly, can make solutions safer even when data is compromised. In certain cases, you may be required to use cryptography to comply with industry regulations (banking) or legal requirements (GDPR). 
```

However, leveraging cryptography is difficult; you need to:
- Pick the right algorithms and options
- Learn the proper way to manage and protect keys

> - Navigate operational complexities when your team wants limit access to cryptographic key material

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Navigate operational complexities when you wants limit access to cryptographic key material
```

> Organizations have increasingly used tools and services to perform crypto outside of applications, including:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Organizations have increasingly used tools and services to perform cryptography outside of applications, including:
```

> - Azure Key Vault, AWS KMS, Google Cloud KMS, etc. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Hashicorp Vault, Azure Key Vault, AWS Key Management Service (KMS), Google Cloud KMS, etc. 
```

> - On-prem HSM products like Thales Luna 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- On-prem Hardware Security Module (HSM) products like Thales Luna 
```

> While those products/services perform the same or very similar operations, their APIs are very different.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While those products/services perform the same or very similar operations, their APIs are different.
```

## Cryptography in Dapr

> Just like how Dapr offers an abstraction on top of secret stores, Dapr offers an abstraction layer on top of key vaults.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Similar to how Dapr offers an abstraction on top of secret stores, Dapr offers an abstraction layer on top of key management services or vaults (for the rest of this document referred to as vaults)
```

With this abstraction layer, you can perform cryptographic operations without having to access raw key material. Dapr provides a selection of correctly configured algorithms that forbid the usage of unsafe algorithms and operations. 

> Todo: diagram

Reviewer 2: Need the Diagram: TODO

> Using the cryptography in Dapr:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By using the cryptography API it:
```

- Makes it easier for you to perform cryptographic operations in a safe way. Dapr provides safeguards against using unsafe algorithms, or using algorithms with unsafe options.
- Keeps keys outside of applications. Applications never see key material, but can request the vault to perform operations with the keys.
- Allows greater separation of concerns. By using external vaults, only authorized teams can access private/shared key materials.
- Simplifies key management and key rotation. Keys are managed in the vault and outside of the application, and they can be rotated without needing the developers to be involved (or even without restarting the apps).
- Enables better audit logging to monitor when operations are performed with keys in the vault.

[Learn more about the cryptography API]({{< ref cryptography_API.md >}})

## Features

> Todo: cryptography building block features organized under header 3 sections.

Reviewer 2: TODO

---
type: docs
title: Cryptography overview
linkTitle: Overview
weight: 1000
description: "Overview of Dapr Cryptography"
---

> With the cryptography building block, you can leverage cryptography in a safe and consistent way. Dapr exposes APIs that allows you to perform operations, such as encrypting and decrypting messages, within the Dapr sidecar, without exposing cryptographic keys to your application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the cryptography building block, you can leverage cryptography in a safe and consistent way. Dapr exposes APIs that allow you to perform operations, such as encrypting and decrypting messages, within key vaults or the Dapr sidecar, without exposing cryptographic keys to your application.
```

Alternatively, you can configure Dapr to manage the cryptographic keys for you, performing operations within the sidecar, again without exposing raw key material to your application.

## Cryptography in Dapr

With Dapr, you can perform cryptographic operations without exposing cryptographic keys to your application.

<img src="/images/cryptography-overview.png" width=1000 style="padding-bottom:15px;" alt="Diagram showing how Dapr cryptography works with your app">

By using the cryptography building block, you can:

- More easily perform cryptographic operations in a safe way. Dapr provides safeguards against using unsafe algorithms, or using algorithms with unsafe options.
- Keep keys outside of applications. Applications never see the "raw key material", but can request the vault to perform operations with the keys. When using the cryptographic engine of Dapr, operations are performed safely within the Dapr sidecar.

> - Experience greater separation of concerns. By using external vaults or cryptographic components, only authorized teams can access private/shared key materials.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Experience greater separation of concerns. By using external vaults or cryptographic components, only authorized teams can access private key materials.
```

- Manage and rotate keys more easily. Keys are managed in the vault and outside of the application, and they can be rotated without needing the developers to be involved (or even without restarting the apps).
- Enables better audit logging to monitor when operations are performed with keys in a vault.

{{% alert title="Note" color="primary" %}}

> While both HTTP and gRPC are supported in the alpha release, using the SDKs with gRPC is the recommended approach for cryptography.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While both HTTP and gRPC are supported in the alpha release, using the gRPC APIs with the supported Dapr SDKs is the recommended approach for cryptography.
```

{{% /alert %}}

## Features

### Cryptographic components

> Similar to how Dapr offers an abstraction on top of secret stores, Dapr offers an abstraction layer on top of key management services or vaults (for the rest of this document referred to as "vaults").
> 
> Dapr includes a set of cryptographic components that:
> - Perform cryptographic operations within the Dapr sidecar
> - Can be used when key vaults are not available  
>   
> With these components, cryptographic operations are performed within Dapr's own cryptographic engine, again without exposing keys to your application.
> 
> Both kinds of components, either those leveraging key vaults or using the cryptopgrahic engine in Dapr, offer the same abstraction layer. This allows your solution to switch between various vaults and/or cryptography components as needed. For example, you can use a locally-stored key during development, and a cloud vault in production.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Dapr cryptography building block incldues two kinds of components:

- Components that allow interacting with management services or vaults ("key vaults"). Similar to how Dapr offers an "abstraction layer" on top of various secret stores or state stores, these components allow interacting with various key vaults such as Azure Key Vault (with more coming in future Dapr releases). With these components, cryptographic operations on the private keys are performed within the vaults and Dapr never sees your private keys.
- Alternatively, when key vaults are not available, you can leverage components based on Dapr's own cryptographic engine. These components, which have `.dapr.` in the name, perform cryptographic operations within the Dapr sidecar, with keys stored on files, Kubernetes secrets, or other sources. Although the private keys are known by Dapr, they are still not available to your applications.

Both kinds of components, either those leveraging key vaults or using the cryptopgrahic engine in Dapr, offer the same abstraction layer. This allows your solution to switch between various vaults and/or cryptography components as needed. For example, you can use a locally-stored key during development, and a cloud vault in production.
```

{{% alert title="Note" color="primary" %}}
While both HTTP and gRPC are supported in the alpha release, using the SDKs with gRPC is the recommended approach for high-level cryptography.
{{% /alert %}}

## Features

### Abstraction layer

Similar to how Dapr offers an abstraction on top of secret stores, Dapr offers an abstraction layer on top of key management services or vaults (for the rest of this document referred to as "vaults").

Dapr includes a set of components ("built-in cryptography" components) that:
- Perform cryptographic operations within the Dapr sidecar
- Can be used when key vaults are not available  
  
With these components, cryptographic operations are performed within Dapr's own cryptographic engine, again without exposing keys to your application.

Both kinds of components, either those leveraging key vaults or using the built-in cryptopgrahic engine in Dapr, offer the same abstraction layer. This allows your solution to switch between various vaults and/or built-in cryptography components as needed. For example, you can use a locally-stored key during development, and a cloud vault in production.

### High-level cryptography APIs

> High-level APIs allow encrypting and decrypting data using the [Dapr Crypto Scheme v1](https://dapr.io/enc/v1). This is an opinionated encryption scheme designed to use modern, safe cryptographic standards, and processes data (even large files) efficiently as a stream.

Reviewer 2: This URL to dapr.io looks wrong. Is this correct?

Reviewer: We discussed that offline, seems to be a bug in the website. I can help debugging but I don't have access to the Netlify account

Author: @ItalyPaleAle in the meantime, we can link to the GH reference - Mark sent me that link

- Manage and rotate keys more easily. Keys are managed in the vault and outside of the application, and they can be rotated without needing the developers to be involved (or even without restarting the apps).
- Enables better audit logging to monitor when operations are performed with keys in a vault.

{{% alert title="Note" color="primary" %}}
While both HTTP and gRPC are supported in the alpha release, using the gRPC APIs with the supported Dapr SDKs is the recommended approach for cryptography.
{{% /alert %}}

## Features

### Cryptographic components

The Dapr cryptography building block incldues two kinds of components:

- **Components that allow interacting with management services or vaults ("key vaults").**   
   Similar to how Dapr offers an "abstraction layer" on top of various secret stores or state stores, these components allow interacting with various key vaults such as Azure Key Vault (with more coming in future Dapr releases). With these components, cryptographic operations on the private keys are performed within the vaults and Dapr never sees your private keys.

> - **Components based on Dapr's own cryptographic engine with keys stored on files.**  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Components based on Dapr's own cryptographic engine.**  
```
